	- A distributed system is:
		○ many machines working together as if they are one system.
		○ Multiple computers (servers) connected over a network, working together to behave like one powerful system.
	- why do we even need distributed systems?
		○ too many users, Millions open the app at the same moment. One server cannot handle millions of requests per second.
		○ Too much data (petabytes of data)
		○ Need for high reliability, If your only server dies, your whole business dies. Companies need systems that continue working even when hardware fails.
		○ Need for fast global access, A user in Egypt, another in Germany, another in the USA. One server cannot give all of them low-latency responses.
	- explain the following?
		○ Scalability: (how to handle more workload)
			§ vertical scalability (scale up): upgrade the server to more powerful server (more ram …etc.)
			§ horizontal scalability (scale out): Add more machines when load increases
		○ Elasticity: (focus on both directions, increase and decrease based on traffic)
			§ Resources automatically grow and shrink based on traffic.
			§ cloud providers like AWS support these.
		○ Replication: 
			§ Data is copied across multiple machines to improve availability and fault tolerance. There are different replication models such as master slave and others.
			§ Synchronous Replication (with writes): Every write operation must be applied to all replicas at the same time before the system acknowledges success to the client 
				□ strong consistency, less scalability, less availability, more latency, slower writes but no data loss in case of primary failure
			§ Asynchronous Replication (with writes): The primary node write the data first then immediately acknowledges writes to the client without waiting for replicas to confirm. after that Replicas are updated in the background 
				□ faster writes, more scalability, eventual consistency, more availability
				□ less latency but potential data loss if for any reason the replica wasn't update with new value then it will have the old value for ever
		○ Fault Tolerance: 
			§ System keeps working even if one machine dies
		○ SPOF (single point of failure)
			§ A component (server, database, network device) whose failure will bring down the entire system
		○ Redundancy
			§ Having duplicate components so that if one fails, another can take over (like backup)
		○ Availability: 
			§ The system is able to serve users most of the time and Users can access the system successfully when they try, even when server fail
		○ Consistency: 
			§ All machines see the same data.
			§ Strong consistency: all servers see the new value immediately, like bank balance or booking ticket.
			§ Eventual consistency: servers may show old data briefly (for short time), like post/comment update/delete in facebook, sometimes it's acceptable depending on the business.
		○ Partitioning: 
			§ splitting data into logical parts, which can be within the same server or across multiple servers depending on the system.
		○ Sharding: 
			§ Splitting data across many machines
		○ Latency: 
			§ Delay to respond
		○ reliability: 
			§ Reliability is the system’s ability to run correctly over time, tolerating failures without data loss or incorrect behavior (do what's supposed to do) 
		○ Coordination:
			§ how multiple machines agree on one decision so the system does not behave incorrectly?
			§ Imagine there is one last airplane seat, and there's request from egypt and another from USA and each go to different servers, then how your distributed system handle these situation?
		○ cluster
			§ means group of separate computers or servers that work together as one system.
	- what's the difference between fault tolerance and availability?
		○ they are connected but are not the same.
		○ system may have High availability but low fault tolerance
			§ you have powerful server with no backups, so your system available unless it fails
			§ availability touches with latency, load and responsiveness, for example we made our system available 99% percent of the time or 99.99% percent .
		○ system may have High fault tolerance but low availability
			§ A system might survive failures but take a long time to recover or respond slowly
			§ fault tolerance means when part of system dies, then who should your system recover quickly and make your data in safe hand.
	- what's master-slave in systems or databases, how it's useful?
		○ It is a replication model where you have main node/nodes called the master and one or more secondary nodes called slaves.
		○ The master is the only one who receives write operations, The slaves only receive read operations and copies of the master data.
		○ A write request goes to the master, then The master updates its data, then:
			§ if strong consistency, The master sends the new data to the slaves so they become copies of it then response to the user, now slaves ready to read operations
			§ if eventually consistency, the master response to the user then The master sends the new data to the slaves so they become copies of it, now slaves ready to read operations
		○ reduce load on the master by sending read operations to slaves, very useful in heavy/intensive read systems.
		○ can increase availability since slaves can take over when the master fails.
	- what's the difference between replica, redundancy, partitioning, sharding?
		○ Replication (copy data) 
			§ focuses on data and means copying data from one server to other servers.
		○ Redundancy (copy component/resource …) 
			§ means having extra resources available so the system keeps working if something fails (servers, databases (backup), networks, power supplies, disks).
		○ Partitioning 
			§ means splitting one database table into logical parts inside the same database server.
			§ horizontal partitioning
				□ for example the able order is split into partition 2023, 2024 …
				□ organize and speed up large tables, inside same server like single big notebook divided into sections
			§ vertical partitioning
				□ split the columns itself in very big table that consist of multiple columns and connect them by FK
		○ sharding
			§ means splitting the data across multiple servers or multiple database instances, focuses on different machines.
			§ for example, user A to M lives on Server1, user N to Z lives on server2, like instead of one notebook, you make multiple notebook each7 for some sort of data
	- what's the problems that may appears with sharding?
		○ joins, because you will need to make network calls so it slow the query and make it complex (cross sharding queries).
	- explain ACID in databases
		○ ensure a transaction is safe and reliable, A transaction is a group of operations that act like one unit 
			§ like transfer money from one account to another (subtract from account A and add to account B).
		○ A for Atomicity
			§ Atomicity means all or nothing, Either the entire transaction happens or none of it happens, no partial changes
			§ If the system crashes after subtracting money from account A but before adding to account B, then the database rolls back the transaction
		○ C for Consistency (definition of consistency here differ from system design)
			§ Consistency means the data must move from one valid state to another valid state based on rules, constraints (FK, unique …) and business logic.
			§ for example bank account balance cannot become negative, or FK mustn't refer to id that doesn't, or redundant value in unique columns …etc.
			
		○ I for Isolation
			§ Isolation means your transaction should not see the unfinished work of another transaction.
			§ Transactions run as if they are happening alone, even if many people are using the system at once.
			§ isolation protect you from concurrency problems like dirty reads …etc.
		○ D for Durability
			§ Durability means once a transaction is committed, the data will not be lost, even if the system crashes.
